 Investing in Children: Early findings on
    the difference the Scottish Child
   Payment makes to child well-being

 Kate Andersen, Suzanna Nesom, Ruth
 Patrick, Ilona Pinter, Kitty Stewart and
              Emma Tominey




Table of Contents
1.         Introduction ........................................................................................................... 1
2.         Social security in Scotland and the Scottish Child Payment ..... 3
3.   Why might the Scottish Child Payment affect family and child
outcomes? ........................................................................................................................... 6
4.         Methods .................................................................................................................... 9
     4.1      Mixed methods ..................................................................................................... 9
5.         Findings................................................................................................................... 17
     5.1      Qualitative ............................................................................................................ 17
     5.2      Quantitative ............................................................................................... 30
6.         Conclusions ................................................................................................ 34
References ................................................................................................................ 38


CASE/238                                                           Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion
December 2025                                                                London School of Economics
                                                                                         Houghton Street
                                                                                       London WC2A 2AE


                                                                    i
            Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion

The Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion (CASE) is a multi-disciplinary
research centre based at the London School of Economics and Political
Science (LSE), within the Suntory and Toyota International Centres for
Economics and Related Disciplines (STICERD). Our focus is on exploration
of different dimensions of social disadvantage, particularly from
longitudinal and neighbourhood perspectives, and examination of the
impact of public policy.

In addition to our discussion paper series (CASEpapers), we produce
occasional summaries of our research in CASEbriefs, and reports from
various conferences and activities in CASEreports. All these publications are
available to download free from our website.

For further information on the work of the Centre, please contact the Centre
Manager, Naomi Warren, on:

Telephone: UK+20 7955 6679
Email:     n.k.warren@lse.ac.uk
Web site: http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/case




©     Kate Andersen
      Suzanna Nesom
      Ruth Patrick
      Ilona Pinter
      Kitty Stewart
      Emma Tominey

All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.




                                     ii
Editorial note
Kate Andersen is a Research Fellow and Suzanna Nesom a Research
Associate at the University of York. Ruth Patrick is Professor of Social and
Public Policy at the University of Glasgow and Visiting Professor at CASE.
Ilona Pinter is Research Associate at the University of Glasgow and
completed her PhD at CASE. Kitty Stewart is Professor of Social Policy at
LSE and Associate Director of CASE. Emma Tominey is Professor of
Economics at the University of Manchester. We are grateful to the Aberdeen
Financial Fairness Trust for funding the research.

Abstract
Recent years have seen a divergence in welfare of Scotland compared to
other UK nations. The Scottish Government has used its devolved powers
on social security to introduce a package of five Family Payments, the
centrepiece of which is the new Scottish Child Payment (SCP). Introduced
in February 2021, and increased in value on two occasions since then, this
benefit provides £27.15 per week for each child under 16 living in a low-
income household. This policy aims to significantly cut Scotland’s child
poverty rate and has led to a wide gap between the support provided to
families with dependent children north and south of the border.

In this paper, we share emergent findings from a mixed-methods research
programme, which is exploring the impact of the SCP in comparative
perspective. We share early evidence from both qualitative and quantitative
analysis, both of which share the strategy of comparing families receiving
the payment in Scotland to comparable families living in England (or in all
other UK nations). The qualitative evidence comes from interviews with
families in both Scotland and England, whilst the quantitative evidence
comes from a comparison of measures of poverty (child material
deprivation and household food insecurity) in Scotland and England, before
and after the roll-out of the SCP. We reflect on the difference the SCP makes
to childhood experiences and the implications of this payment for children's
long term outcomes.

Key words: child benefits, child poverty, devolution, mixed methods

JEL number: I38, H730

Corresponding author: k.j.stewart@lse.ac.uk




                                     iii
1.    Introduction

Recent analysis by Unicef found that 69 million children live in poverty
across some of the world’s richest countries. Of 39 countries that Unicef
ranked in terms of a combination of their child poverty rate, and its change
in recent years, the UK was one of the very worst performers, and notably
performed worst of all in recording a 19.6% increase in child poverty
between 2012-14 and 2019-21 (Unicef, 2023). These are stark figures,
which reinforce a broader picture in which the UK is an outlier among
wealthy countries in both its high levels of child poverty and its policy
approach. Policies like the UK’s two-child limit, which restricts means-
tested social security support to the first two children in a household, have
been found to be highly unusual worldwide, underpinned by an approach
to children’s benefits in which financial support is made contingent on the
behaviour of adults, rather than centred on the needs of the child (see
Stewart et al, 2025).


The UK’s child poverty landscape demands close interrogation. It will be
especially important to monitor developments under the current Labour
administration, which has committed to the first UK-wide child poverty
strategy in many years, with Prime Minister Keir Starmer pledging that
action to drive child poverty rates down will be a key tenet of his
government, just as it was under his New Labour predecessors (Starmer,
2024).


Importantly, though, looking at child poverty through a whole-UK lens only
tells us part of the story, because of the growing role played by the
devolution of social security within the four countries (see Simpson, 2025).
Significantly, the Scottish Government has used its increased devolved
powers, granted following the unsuccessful Independence Referendum in
2014, to rollout additional social security provision, notably through
targeted support for children.

                                     1
This has included the flagship Scottish Child Payment (SCP), which provides
means-tested, targeted support to children in low-income households
(Social Security Scotland, 2023). One of a suite of what the Scottish
Government describes as the ‘Five Family Payments’, the SCP is at one
level designed to help families with the costs and needs that children bring,
but is also framed within a broader narrative about adequate social security
as both a human right and an investment in the future.


The SCP creates a context in which there is a significant divergence in the
support available to families with children, dependent on which side of the
Scottish border they live. A family with three children receiving Universal
Credit in Glasgow would receive £4,165 more than their counterparts living
in Newcastle, even before wider Scottish Government decisions (including
to mitigate the benefit cap) have been taken into account.


These intra-UK policy differences create a quasi-natural policy experiment
which provides a valuable opportunity to improve our understanding of the
role and impact of targeted cash transfers for children. This is important at
any time, but especially so in a context in which the UK Government has
been reticent to use social security as a mechanism for supporting children
and families out of poverty. In this article, we present new empirical
evidence from mixed-methods research which sheds light on the impact of
devolved differences in social security policy in the UK, and on the role of
cash transfers in tackling childhood poverty and disadvantage. In doing so,
we demonstrate that the SCP demands our attention.




                                     2
2.   Social security in Scotland and the Scottish Child
     Payment

When the Scottish Government obtained devolved powers, it
committed to forging a different approach to social security to that
taken by the Westminster government (Scottish Government, 2017).
A set of social security principles was developed, the first of which
encapsulates the Scottish Government’s view of the purpose of social
security: 'social security is an investment in the people of Scotland'
(Scottish Government, 2017 u.p.). As part of its approach, the
Scottish Government reinstated statutory targets for child poverty
reduction, including the commitment to reduce the percentage of
children in relative poverty to below 10% by 2030. To help meet these
targets, five family payments were introduced. The centrepiece of
these is the SCP, which sits alongside three one-off Best Start Grants,
paid during pregnancy and early childhood, and Best Start Food, a
monthly payment on a card that can be used towards healthy foods
in pregnancy and the first three years of life.


The Scottish Government considered five different options when
developing the SCP (Scottish Government, 2019). These options were
evaluated primarily in regards to their ability to target child poverty
and secondarily in light of their simplicity, consistency, likely take-up
and impact on employment and earnings. The outcome was to
develop a payment tied to entitlement to Universal Credit. The
policy’s aims are set out in Box 1.


The SCP was first introduced in 2021. Initially set at £10 per week for
children under six in families receiving Universal Credit or Pension
Credit, the payment was increased in November 2022 to £25 per
                                      3
week and extended to all under-sixteens in eligible families. It is paid
every four weeks in arrears and rises every April in line with inflation.
As of April 2025, it stands at £27.15 per week. There is no limit on
the number of eligible children that a household can claim for. The
introduction of the SCP thereby constitutes a significant divergence
from the rest of UK policy, where the two-child limit restricts per-child
payments within UC to two children only. To claim the SCP,
applications are made to Social Security Scotland.


Box 1: Policy Aims of the SCP

   ● Achieve a minimum reduction in child poverty (relative, after
     housing costs) of 3 percentage points when the income
     supplement is fully rolled out. This provides a tangible,
     identifiable outcome which can be measured once the SCP is
     rolled out, and ensures that social security provides a
     substantial part of our reduction in poverty whilst being clear
     it cannot be the only solution.
  ● Reduce the depth of poverty and provide support to those
     who need it most. This ensures we support people across the
     lower deciles of the income distribution, rather than simply
     getting those closest to the poverty line over the threshold.
     This relates specifically to the priority groups identified in the
     TCPDP.
  ● Help to support a sustainable and lasting reduction in poverty
     for families with children. This ensures outcomes beyond
     redistribution, supporting people to access wider services and
     support should they want and require it – for example, fast-
     tracked access to a financial health check or employment
     support.
Source: Scottish Government (2020)




                                   4
According to the impact assessment for the SCP, the Scottish
Government anticipated that the policy would disproportionately
benefit those groups most at risk of poverty, namely households with
a disabled parent or child, minority ethnic households, larger families,
lone parents, mothers aged under 25 and families with a baby
(Scottish Government, 2020).


Preexisting academic research on the SCP is limited. The Scottish
Government published an interim evaluation in 2022, largely based
on qualitative interviews with 39 SCP recipients. The data was
collected when the SCP was paid at a rate of £10 per child under six.
The research found that the SCP reduced financial challenges and
improved parental and child wellbeing but it was not set at a level
sufficient to transform family finances (Scottish Government, 2022).
More recently, the Scottish Government (2025) has published a
report presenting findings from a mixed-methods evaluation of the
five family payments. This reports that the SCP enables parents to
buy essentials, improves children's health and reduces material
deprivation, parental stress and debt, but that some still struggle
financially, particularly given the cost of living crisis. The Scottish
Government has also published a report exploring how the SCP
interacts with the Scottish labour market (Scottish Government,
2024). The report concludes that the SCP does not negatively impact
labour market outcomes at scale.


Commissioned by the Trussell Trust and Save the Children, the IPPR
carried out descriptive data analysis and modelling and a small scale
qualitative study on the SCP (Statham, Smith and Parkes, 2023). This
research was also conducted when the SCP was set at £10 for each


                                   5
child under six. This found that the SCP provided more financial
security and flexibility (although these impacts were dampened by
the withdrawal of the £20 Universal Credit uplift) and reduced mental
pressure on parents. Economic modelling showed that the payment
needed to be increased to £40 to have a significant impact on deep
poverty.


As the first independent and comparative evaluation of the SCP, our
ongoing mixed-methods research project will significantly extend the
current research base. By comparing and contrasting experiences in
Scotland to carefully defined comparable families living in England,
we offer new insight into the policy’s impacts. Our quantitative
analysis also adopts a comparative approach, examining differences
between Scotland and England to assess the potential effects of the
SCP. In this first paper we present initial findings on the impact of the
policy on financial well-being, material deprivation and parental
stress. Future work will dig deeper into the effects of the policy,
including an exploration of potential disincentives to work.



3.   Why might the Scottish Child Payment affect family
     and child outcomes?

There is a wide body of research showing that living in poverty is
damaging to children, limiting their daily lives and making it harder
for them to fulfil their potential, with long-term consequences for
future life chances (Brooks-Gunn and Duncan, 1997; Lesner, 2018;
Le Menestrel, 2019; Cooper and Stewart, 2021). Correspondingly,
studies that examine policies that increase income through higher
levels of child and family benefits have been found to have positive

                                   6
impacts on children’s well-being, including on health outcomes at
birth, socio-emotional and cognitive development and achievement in
school (Gennetian and Miller, 2002; Dahl and Lochner, 2012; Hoynes
et al, 2015).


At least two core mechanisms link increased income to children’s
outcomes. First, where parents have more money they can spend
more on things that support children’s needs. For example, Gregg et
al (2006) found that, as low-income families in the UK saw income
rise under New Labour’s tax credit system, they increased spending
on fruit and vegetables, children’s books and toys. Second, managing
on a low income is stressful and takes both time and mental energy.
Increases in income for families living in poverty have been causally
linked to improvements in maternal mental health and reductions in
maternal depression (e.g. Milligan and Stabile, 2011; Evans and
Garthwaite, 2014), with knock-on consequences for children. In
addition, it is increasingly clear that the stigma and deprivations
created by poverty have direct effects on children’s emotional well-
being (Chzen and Main, 2022; Andersen et al, 2024).


Despite the strength of this evidence base, there is a persistent stated
concern among some policymakers that cash benefits discourage
work and result in welfare dependency. For example, the UK’s two-
child limit has been repeatedly justified by government on the
grounds that otherwise parents might simply have additional children
without thinking about the financial consequences: “Families in
receipt of benefits [should] face the same financial choices as those
supporting themselves solely through work” (Work and Pensions
Committee, 2019, p.1). Claims have also been made that, while


                                   7
income matters for children’s experiences, “where income comes
from is critically important. Income from benefits does not have the
same effect as income from work” (HM Government, 2012, p.20).
In practice, however, there is no evidence to suggest that income
from benefits has different effects than income from work. There is
also very mixed evidence that higher child benefits discourage work,
or that cutting them increases participation or work hours (see
extensive discussion in Waldfogel, 2025). It is an inherent feature of
means-testing that the withdrawal of benefits as earnings rise creates
high marginal effective tax rates over a part of the distribution,
particularly affecting second earners. But there is little support for
what economists call ‘income effects’, i.e. that an increased benefit
income leads to reductions in work effort because less work is needed
to reach the same level of income (Stewart et al, 2025).


Based on existing evidence we would therefore expect the SCP to
reduce poverty and improve outcomes for children, with no reason to
expect the majority of parents to respond by reducing work effort.
Two potential caveats are worth mentioning, however, though both
are beyond the scope of the current paper. First, the particular design
of the SCP is rather unusual within modern means-testing structures.
The   decision   to   tie   SCP   eligibility   to   UC   eligibility   reduces
administrative complexity but introduces a sharp cliff-edge: a family
whose earnings take them above the UC threshold would immediately
lose the full amount of the SCP, so a three-child family could lose £75
in benefits for £1 extra in earnings. Future work will look in more
detail at the effects of this potential disincentive, and whether the link
to UC should be revisited.



                                      8
Second, the opportunity cost of funding for the SCP should be noted.
The cost of the SCP is estimated at £500m by 2028-29, covered by
Scotland’s more progressive tax measures (McNulty, 2024). Given
wider pressures on Scottish spending, some commentators have
argued that the SCP may be crowding out other policies required to
combat child poverty, including area-based investments and targeted
support for families with more complex needs (ibid). Undoubtedly
policies that help secure an adequate income are not the only thing
families need. Yet at the same time the evidence base cited above
tells us that other investments in children will be less effective if
families are struggling to make ends meet.


One final point of context is important: this has been a time of rapid
economic change, with a cost-of-living crisis quickly followed by
further economic uncertainty linked to global events. Rather than
making things better for families, the SCP may simply have made
them less bad than they would have been. Comparing outcomes and
experiences between Scotland and England is therefore of key
importance, as this lets us disentangle the impact of wider factors
and allows us to dig into the specific differences the policy is making
to children and families in the current environment.

4.    Methods

4.1   Mixed methods
The Family Finances Project is a two-year multi-method research
programme exploring whether and how the SCP affects family
finances and wellbeing. The research involves descriptive statistics,
quasi-experimental quantitative analysis, and a programme of
qualitative research with 60 parents to better understand the impact

                                  9
of the SCP. In taking a multi-method approach, we draw very closely
on lessons learned from an earlier study that many of us were
involved in, which adopted mixed methods to examine the impact of
the two-child limit and benefit cap on families with three or more
children (Patrick et al, 2023). Through this research, we saw the great
potential   when   these   different    approaches   are   brought   into
conversation with each other, and it can be especially important in
cases such as this one – where the policy under examination is in its
early stages and so there are inevitable time lags before the
quantitative data can reveal impacts and trends. The great merit of
qualitative research is that we can generate new understandings of
policy impacts in real-time.


In the study discussed here, we have adopted an approach piloted in
our previous study of ensuring that quantitative as well as qualitative
researchers on the team undertake the qualitative interviews,
supported by training within the team. This means that members
from across the team have direct access to insights afforded by
actually speaking to someone about the policy. It also aids cross-
methods work, further embedding efforts to bring the different data
sets into conversation with each other. It is also worth stating that
there is an instrumental reason for adopting mixed-methods
approaches, as the combination of statistical evidence with lived
experiences data can help build a persuasive case for key audiences
for policy analysis, including for policymakers and in the media.
Certainly, our experience has been that there is much to commend
the strategy.




                                   10
4.2 Qualitative
Qualitative research was employed to capture detailed, rich and
complex data which reflects the realities of everyday life of people
living in Scotland and England who receive support for children. A
comparative approach was taken to help explore and identify the
impact of the SCP in the context of wider pressures on household
finances; in particular, the ongoing cost of living crisis. We compared
and   contrasted   experiences   in    Scotland   to   carefully   defined
comparable families in England with similar financial challenges.


Individual interviews were conducted between January and October
2025 with participants living in Scotland and Northern England. The
research team worked with gatekeeper organisations including local
authorities and charities to recruit families who received Universal
Credit (all families) and the SCP (Scottish families) and who had at
least one dependent child living with them. We used a sampling frame
to ensure we included some families in each of the categories that the
Scottish Government anticipated would disproportionately benefit
from the policy. We also sought to include parents living in urban and
rural locations, and parents who were in and out of paid work. We
interviewed a higher number of Scottish families (n=40) to capture
different experiences of receipt of the SCP, alongside 20 families in
England. Table 1 sets out key characteristics of the sample.


The interviews were conducted over the telephone. Interview guides
were used to explore parents' experiences of receiving Universal
Credit and (for the Scottish parents) the SCP, and how the level of
their benefit payments affected their lives. The interview guide
covered the impacts of the policies on the participants' household


                                  11
finances, mental health, children, and motivation and effort to find
paid work. During the interviews, timelines were completed with the
participants to capture the key events and changes in the participants'
lives from January 2020 (approximately a year before the SCP was
first introduced) and now. There was also space for participants to
record their hopes, plans and fears for the coming two years.


Table 1: Key characteristics of the sample
                                              Scotland   England
Households with a disabled parent of child            15         11
Households without disabled parent or child           25          9
Lone parent                                           30         14
Coupled parent                                        10          6
Minority ethnic household                             15          7
White household                                       25         13
Larger family (3+ children)                           13          6
Smaller family                                        27         14
Parent under 25                                        8          5
Parent 25 or over                                     32         15
Family with a baby                                     5          3
Family without a baby                                 35         17
Rural area                                             8          5
Urban area                                            32         15
Household in paid work                                15          7
Household not in paid work                            25         13


With the participants' permission, all of the interviews were audio-
recorded and transcribed verbatim. The data was coded in NVivo and
analysed thematically. The research received formal ethical approval
from the University of York and LSE. The fieldwork was underpinned
by an ethic of care and particular attention was paid to informed
voluntary consent (obtained via an online consent form prior to the
interview or recorded verbally at the start of the interview),
confidentiality and anonymity, prevention of harm and reciprocity. All



                                     12
interviews have been anonymised, and in the following excerpts
aliases are used.


4.3 Quantitative


For the quantitative analysis we take a quasi-experimental approach,
treating the SCP’s introduction as a natural experiment affecting
otherwise identical families north and south of the border, and
applying a difference-in-difference (DiD) design. The analysis uses
data from the Family Resources Survey (FRS), a nationally
representative cross-sectional annual survey of private households in
the UK (DWP, 2024 and earlier editions). The FRS is used to construct
the Households Below Average Income (HBAI) dataset, which
provides harmonised variables over time focused on living standards.
We use data for 2016/17-2023/24 (DWP, 2025). To match our
analysis most closely with the qualitative data, we focus on two
needs-based measures of poverty: child material deprivation and
household food insecurity.


We restrict our sample to children aged 16 and under, reflecting SCP
eligibility criteria, and to households residing in Scotland or England.
We exclude data from 2020 due to pandemic-related disruptions, in
line with official guidance. This gives us a final sample of 50,945
children, comprising 44,856 in England and 6,089 in Scotland. We
treat the individual child as the unit of analysis throughout and use
the dependent child weight provided in the HBAI dataset (gs_indch).




                                   13
Our basic empirical specification is the following:


𝑃𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑦 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜆1 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑡𝑖 + 𝜆2 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 + 𝛿(𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑡𝑖 ⋅ 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 ) + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡


where 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑡𝑖 is a dummy variable equal to one if the child resides in
Scotland and equal to zero if they live in England. 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy
variable equal to one if the child is observed after the expansion of
the policy to all children under 16 on the 14th November 2022. The
coefficient of interest is 𝛿, which captures the differential change in
deeper poverty measures in Scotland relative to England following the
introduction of the SCP. 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is a vector of controls including dummies
for lone parenthood, household head under 25, female-headed
household, household disability status, ethnicity (five categories) and
larger families, defined as those with three or more dependent
children. We also include year fixed effects.


Material deprivation captures the inability to afford essential items
and activities deemed necessary for an acceptable standard of living.
The child material deprivation indicator is constructed from responses
to whether the household can afford 21 core items with a focus on
children’s needs (e.g., fresh fruit and vegetables, a warm winter coat,
participation in school trips). To reflect public perception of
necessities, the material deprivation items in the FRS are periodically
updated. In the 2023/24 survey, the sample was randomly split: 75%
of respondents answered the updated questions, and 25% answered
the previous set. From 2024/25, only the revised questions will be
used. Although direct comparisons in the absolute measures between
2022/23 and 2023/24 deprivation measures are not recommended,
our DiD framework instead compares the change in material


                                       14
deprivation in Scotland versus England across time. Assuming that
the updated questions are not systematically higher in one country
compared to the other, relative to the previous set of questions, this
provides a valid set up to compare whether the SCP rollout led to a
change in material deprivation in Scotland compared to England.


Food security is measured at the household level via responses from
the person most knowledgeable about food procurement and
preparation. The measure is based on a series of questions about
whether household members are having to miss meals, cut back on
food intake or eat less balanced meals for financial reasons. This
measure is not specifically child-focused and experiences may differ
across household members (e.g. parents may go hungry to protect
children’s food intake). The food security questions have only been
included since 2019/20 so our analysis starts at that point.


Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the full sample by country.
In Scotland there are fewer larger families and a higher proportion of
children from white households than in England. Table A1 shows
summary statistics before and after the rollout of the SCP by country
of residence. While there are clear differences between children in
Scotland and in England, there is no evidence of substantial
compositional changes observed in the differences between children
in Scotland and England before and after the introduction of the SCP.
This suggests that compositional change is unlikely to affect the
validity of our DiD estimates. We formally assess this using parallel
trends analysis of covariates (Table A2).




                                  15
Table 2: Summary Statistics, 2016/17 - 2023/24
                                   Scotland               England
Child Material Deprivation          0.151                  0.205
Food Insecure Households            0.135                  0.150
Larger families                     0.252                  0.320
Lone parent households              0.225                  0.224
Young head of household             0.041                  0.030
Female head of household            0.427                  0.410
Disabled household                  0.381                  0.355
White households                    0.918                  0.766

 N                                    6,089                 44,856
Notes: (i) Mean values of each variable by country. (ii) We use the dependent
child weight provided in the HBAI dataset.
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2016/17-2023/24 HBAI data, 19th edition
(DWP, 2025).


A key identifying assumption of the DiD approach is that, in the
absence of the SCP, our indicators would have followed parallel trends
in Scotland and England. We present the data visually at the start of
the results section, showing similar pre-treatment trends across the
two countries. To test the assumption more formally, we estimate
event-study models that replace the post-treatment indicator with
quarter dummies (see Table A3). Although a few pre-SCP coefficients
are statistically significant, they are small, noisy, and lack a
consistent pattern. These findings support the use of the DiD
approach to estimate the causal impact of the SCP on poverty
outcomes but highlight the need to control for characteristics and year
fixed effects in our models.




                                     16
5.    Findings

5.1   Qualitative
In this section, we focus on the emerging findings from the qualitative
interviews with parents receiving Universal Credit in Scotland and in
England. We consider what parents in Scotland told us about the
difference that the SCP makes to their families. We compare this with
what parents in England told us about the struggle to get by in a
social security system with lower financial support for children and
what they would do with a sum equivalent to the SCP per child
(roughly £100 per child per month).


Investing in children’s needs and development
Overwhelmingly, parents receiving the SCP said that it made a
significant difference to their families’ lives in various ways. Parents
had additional resources to meet the basic needs of the household,
such as food and utilities and enabled them to invest in child-specific
items and experiences. The child-specific items included essentials
like clothing and shoes, food including fruits and vegetables, snacks,
treats or food specific to children’s dietary needs as well as other
developmental, educational, health and well-being related needs:



      “So it’s his money and his needs like maybe sometimes
      uniform, sometimes part of shoes, maybe sometimes he
      wants to go out. So, that’s his money like, yeah, I use that
      for his needs and his, whatever he wishes for.”

      Grace, single parent, child aged 7 years, Scotland




                                  17
     “I pay for her toy fund, if she wants to eat, for example if
     she wants her McDonalds…sometimes I buy shoes from it
     if her shoes are worn out for example because of the
     weather, she needed the boots, so I bought her boots.”

     Josephine, single parent, child aged 4 years, Scotland

Many parents spoke about being able to pay for children’s sports
activities or lessons to support their healthy development, such as
swimming and martial arts lessons, soft play centres and sensory
toys, football and gymnastics clubs. The SCP also enabled parents to
pay for social activities, youth clubs, scouts and nature clubs,
educational activities like language lessons, leisure and creative
activities like crafting equipment, or being able to take children on
outings or to the theatre:



     “[The SCP] has enabled to me get my son swimming
     lessons that I wouldn’t have been able to afford otherwise,
     you know. So, it’s gave me that extra bit of breathing
     space to get little educational-type things for my son that
     I normally wouldn’t be able to afford. So, it has definitely
     been noticeable in my household, yeah, that extra
     money.”

     Olivia, single parent with a disability, child aged 9 years,
     Scotland



Often the activities and experiences that parents were investing in
supported children’s emotional, social and mental health needs as
well as their physical development. For example, one parent


                                  18
explained that the SCP helped to pay for clubs that in turn helped her
children’s physical, psychological and social development:



     “Seeing my son actually going to those clubs, he’s got
     great friendship groups in there. They do lots of activities.
     That is something that I wouldn’t be able to do with them
     because they learn, they’ve got completely different
     groups of friends, they meet different people, they go to
     events. This is something that I wouldn’t be able to do for
     him. I think even the martial arts, they teach you to be
     more resilient because it is not only that they just kick
     each other, there is more to it. The wildlife club, he loves
     the most.”

     Sidney, single parent, children aged 11 and 17 years,
     Scotland



There were other ways in which parents were able to invest in their
children’s future well-being and security, for example, by making
savings or opening a junior ISA.

     “I’ve got a savings account for my first daughter. I’ve still
     to sort one out for my baby, and I use money from the
     Scottish Child Payment to put into that, and then like, I
     kind of like to use the Scottish Child Payment like if there’s
     anything kind of related I need, just because in my head,
     child payment goes on the child. You know, it just makes
     sense to me.”

     Bethany, parent in a couple, children aged 2 years and
     under 1, Scotland

                                   19
Generally, parents reported that the SCP is making a ‘significant’
difference to children and families in Scotland. But the extent to which
parents felt it made a difference varied based on a number of factors
including family circumstances. For some families, particularly larger
families, where the SCP comprised a larger proportion of their
disposable income, it made a really significant difference:



     “To be honest, that’s really helped. That benefit is really
     helpful, to be honest. It’s just covered the gap that like my
     two other kids were born after 2017. So, they don’t get
     anything from Universal Credit. But that covers that gap.
     The Scottish child payment is like the most helpful thing.
     It’s just helpful. It’s really helpful.”

     Rosalind, parent in a couple, children aged 3, 7, 9 and 13
     years, Scotland



This was also the case for some younger parents. Alicia, who was
receiving the lower rate of UC for parents under 25 years and had not
yet started receiving the SCP for her youngest child, found the
additional support provided by SCP significant:



     “It helped me feel a lot less stressed about money. £200
     a month is a lot, it goes quite a long way.”

     Alicia, single parent under 25, children aged 1, 3 and 4
     years, Scotland




                                     20
Surviving not thriving
While some parents said they ‘ringfenced’ SCP for primarily child-
related expenses, others said they used the money as part of an
overall ‘pot’ to meet the essential needs of their family members,
including paying for gas and electricity bills and food shopping. For
these participants, the SCP was often a lifeline, which tided them over
until their next Universal Credit payment. Gwen, a single parent with
one child, explained that she liked getting the SCP every four weeks,
as it meant that along with her twice monthly Universal Credit
payments and Child Benefit payment, she had money coming in every
week which meant she could buy food consistently. When asked what
she'd spent her last SCP on, she explained:



     I had to buy dog food and I had to buy shopping. Like it
     was dire in that, actually my daughter said to me do we
     have any money mum and I was like yeah, of course we
     do, but we didn't. She went, because I've got money in
     my purse. She was looking for     like snacks and there
     was really nothing.

     Gwen, single parent, 1 child aged 11, Scotland



During   our   interviews   we   discussed    how   families’   financial
circumstances had changed since January 2020. Many of the families
had experienced significant financial hardship over the past few years
due to benefit cuts, personal crises, the Covid pandemic and the cost
of living crisis. The SCP, in the form of regular cash-based support,
gave parents the agency to spend the money according to their
children’s and household needs and circumstances, including in


                                  21
response to income or expenditure shocks. For example, Bethany, a
younger parent in receipt of the lower rate of Universal Credit due to
her age, reflected:



     “Just that extra help, like the extra £100 that we got with
     my first [child], that was like, kind of saved us a lot of
     times back then when we were struggling, and now it’s
     just like, extra financial relief, you know? It’s just, it’s a
     good system because kids are too expensive. They need a
     lot of things, so it’s helpful to have kind of money that you
     could dedicate to them or bills or whatever you need it to.
     You know, whatever’s best for you at that time.”

     Bethany, parent in a couple under 25, children aged 2
     years and under 1, Scotland



Unsurprisingly, many parents referred to the increasing costs of
essential items and expenses as a result of inflation in recent years,
particularly food, gas, electricity, and fuel costs, which increased
money worries and limited what they were able to get with the SCP.
Several parents were keen to express their gratitude for the SCP but
some also felt that while helpful and ‘100% needed’, it was not
enough to lift children out of poverty or meet the costs they had to
meet children’s needs in reality. Several participants like Hope, a
single parent with two children, commented that more per child is
needed, particularly in light of the cost of living increases:




                                   22
     “I would say either double or triple because nowadays food
     costs more, again, raising a child is always going to be
     expensive, like there’s always going to be things…But
     yeah, I would always say more is better, just make sure
     children are comfortable and parents aren’t under stress
     because it is, not having money is hard. You feel like you’re
     failing every day and you’re like but I’m not, the children
     are alive, they’re well. And again, if we’re wanting to keep
     children healthy, we have to give them food that isn’t food
     bank   food,   that   isn’t   tinned   hotdogs   and   tinned
     meatballs.”.

     Hope, single parent, children aged 9 and 17 years,
     Scotland



Some also felt that it should be extended for those over 16, to make
it consistent with other benefits for children and because their
children’s needs continue. William, a coupled father with three
children, felt that the SCP had made a ‘big difference’ to his family
and gave them ‘a lot of that extra breathing, financial breathing
room’. However, his oldest child no longer qualified for the SCP and
another was approaching the cut off point but the family still needed
the financial support:




                                   23
     “I do think I’ve said this before, that if kids stay on for
     further education as in sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, they
     should maybe consider extending that. Because if a child
     wants to stay on at school some parents might not be in
     the position to afford that and a child might just go straight
     to work at sixteen rather than stay on in education due to
     financial costs. So I think extending that would benefit a
     lot of kids and therefore their parents because the financial
     impact of that would be, you know, there would be
     systems there. So if the government are serious about kids
     being in school longer and get better qualifications, then
     that would be a step in the right direction.”

     William, parent in a couple, children aged 12, 15 and 17,
     Scotland



Children aged 16 and older become eligible for the Education
Maintenance Allowance (EMA), which is currently paid at £30 per
week, but only during term-time. Therefore, the amount overall that
children receive is less than they would through the SCP. It is also
conditional on children’s attendance and participation in education
and is paid to children directly, therefore is less reliable to support
household expenditure. One parent spoke about this in detail: her son
had ‘aged out’ and was now receiving the EMA. However, as the EMA
went directly to him, he spent it as he liked and therefore she could
not rely on this to meet their household needs to cover things like
food and bills:




                                  24
     “He’s just a teenager, he’ll spend it, he does not think. Like
     I think it’s the cause of arguments in this house, I’m like,
     “You know I get zero money from you.” He’s like, “Do you
     want me to move out?” and it’s like, “You can’t afford to
     move out.” [laughs] But yeah, it’s just I was saying he just
     buys like occasional PlayStation games and I’m like, “I
     could have bought your dinner for that.” [laughs].”

     Hope, single parent, children aged 9 and 17, Scotland



So despite the EMA, the withdrawal of the SCP when a child reaches
the age of 16 years can cause families financial hardship and could
be considered a premature age threshold as this support ends while
parents are still financially responsible for their dependent children.


Relieving parental stress
By enabling parents to be able to meet their children’s and wider
family needs, some participants reflected that it reduced their worries
about their finances, ‘saving them’ in difficult times and providing
much needed relief from the pressures they faced in supporting their
family. Some described the extra help as giving them a chance ‘to
breathe’ or to ‘have freedom’ and choice over providing items and
experiences for their children.

     “I think it's a lot better [having SCP], like it stops my
     worrying. Like kind of gives us that little extra top up if we
     need food, if we need nappies and wipes, and like gas and
     electric, and it just gives us like that benefit of the doubt.”

     Kay, parent in a couple under 25, child aged under 1 year,
     Scotland


                                   25
     “Well yes, I suppose we get to do more things. And before
     it was really d’you know like whatever was in the fridge
     would be in the fridge, and he wouldn’t starve. But now
     he’s got a lot more freedom and we can do a lot more
     activities together. And obviously when I’m not stressing
     about money obviously my mental health improves, so if
     I’m happy he’s happy.”

     Sabrina, single parent, child aged 6 years, Scotland



Having cash support to use for their household or for their children as
needed, and being able to adapt their spending based on their
changing circumstances such as increasing costs due to inflation or
expenditure shocks, contributed to this sense of relief. Additionally,
some parents reflected on feelings of guilt at frequently having to say
‘no’ to their children, but with the SCP, they were able to say ‘yes’
sometimes. It also enabled some parents to engage particularly older
children in financial decision-making.


Comparing findings from families in England
In contrast to the Scottish families, the vast majority of the families
in England we spoke to were barely getting by and were often only
able to manage due to help from extended family members. Without
the 'lifeline' that the SCP provided to the Scottish participants, the
English participants desperately struggled to meet basic household
needs including food, clothing and utilities:




                                   26
     “You know because without this money [Universal Credit]
     I couldn’t pay my rent but it’s just not enough. You know
     I don’t want to go on a luxury holiday, I don’t want, well I
     do but [laughs] you know I don’t want designer clothes
     and you know gorgeous handbags, I just want enough
     money to be able to feed my kids. And be able, and not
     have to rely on my parents to do my supermarket
     shopping.”

     Addison, parent in couple, children aged 4 and 9 years,
     England



     “It's been tough. We're relying a lot on like food banks and
     I've borrowed a lot off my family. Like my mum and my
     dad. I've got into quite a bit of debt with like my gas and
     electric and stuff…I try not to let it affect him [son] but
     there has been times where he's come up and we've had
     like no electric or we've had no gas. Like over Christmas
     we couldn't really have the lights on because obviously like
     it was eating away at the electric so much. I think he has
     noticed and it has got to him a bit.”

     Amba, single parent, child aged 9 years, England



Overall the families in England were less able to invest in child-specific
activities and experiences, like sports clubs, lessons, social activities
with friends and days out for the family:




                                   27
     But also you know I struggle a lot in terms of not being
     able to do the extra, I don’t know if I’d call it
     extracurricular clubs for my children. I really would wish
     to sign them up for those kind of things. It’s okay
     everything they learn in school but I also believe that
     those extras they help, they also give children different
     skills in life. So if I was on top of being able to afford the
     food and everything in the else, I would wish to be able to
     afford those kind of stuff, signing them up for clubs.

     Esther, single parent, three children aged 10 years, 2
     years and 8 months, England



     It’s like if someone said do you and the kids want to come
     bowling this evening, we can’t do things spontaneously.
     So everything has to be planned in advance, in those kind
     of scenarios, they’re aware, they know that if a friend rang
     you up and said do you want to go to McDonalds for dinner
     tonight for example, no because I have to make sure
     mum’s got paid, or mum’s got money or whatever.

     Jennifer, single parent, four children aged 16. 10, 8 and 7
     years, England



Echoing the sentiments of participants in Scotland, participants in
England felt that having extra support at the value of the SCP would
be a ‘huge’ help for their families in helping to provide for their
children, including food, clothes, shoes, activities, school-related
expenses and personal care. Some parents also felt it would reduce
their worries about money by enabling them to provide essentials like

                                  28
food and clothing for their children, and to support their growth and
development:



     “Oh a massive difference. A massive difference. Like I
     know people don't think that's a lot, but that £25 is like
     another three meals. Like it would take that stress out of
     like worrying about where we're going to get food
     shopping from and stuff.”

     Amba, single parent, child aged 9 years, England



Some parents also felt that having access to this type of support
across the UK would be fair, given the widespread financial hardship.
As one parent in England said in relation to the extra support given
in Scotland:

     Well it's amazing for them, it's absolutely wonderful for
     them. But it is frustrating because it's like, well why can't
     we do more for people that need support also? And for
     children that need support? I've known of children that
     don't get breakfast, don't get tea and that the parents
     physically can't afford it. Some people don't have any
     support at all and the benefits is the only thing that they
     get. I'm in a very, very privileged situation that I have my
     dad and I have my mum and that they can afford
     to support me where I can't get what I need. But yes it's
     heartbreaking really.

     Chloe, single parent, children aged 6, 10 and 11, England




                                  29
Our interviews with English parents, who receive lower social security
for their children than their Scottish counterparts, show that families
are unable to get by on current levels of support. Households often
have to rely on extended family to meet basic necessities and
households who do not receive such support go without. Parents are
also unable to afford experiences and activities important to children's
everyday experiences of childhood and life chances. Inability to meet
basic needs and to afford activities also has negative emotional
impacts, causing both significant parental stress and child distress.


5.2    Quantitative
Figure 1 shows trends over time in both of our deprivation indicators.
Child material deprivation is rising in both England and Scotland.
However, after following fairly similar trends in the pre-treatment
period, the rise appears to be steeper in England. In relation to food
insecurity, the figure shows stability or even decline in Scotland while
food insecurity in England has risen. Both figures point to divergence
in the indicators between the nations after the introduction of the
SCP.




                                  30
Figure 1: Child material deprivation and children living in food
insecure households by country.




Notes: (i) The figure presents the annual average proportion of children aged 16
and under who are materially deprived and living in food insecure households by
country. (ii) Estimates are weighted using the dependent child weight provided in
the HBAI dataset (gs_indch). (iii) The dashed vertical line indicates the start of
the post-SCP period (2022/23), following the expansion of the SCP to all eligible
families with children under 16 and the increase to £20 per week per child. (iv)
Data for 2020/21 are excluded due to pandemic-related disruptions in survey
collection, which affected data quality and comparability. (v) The dashed line
between 2022/23 and 2023/24 for material deprivation reflects changes in the
deprivation questions; as a result, direct comparisons across these years should
be interpreted with caution.
Source: Authors’ calculations using HBAI 19th edition (DWP, 2025).


We use DiD models to test formally whether we are seeing divergent
trends in the two nations, and whether any differences are robust to


                                       31
the inclusion of control variables. Table 3 presents coefficient
estimates from models assessing the impact of the SCP on child
material deprivation (Panel A) and household food insecurity (Panel
B), both with and without controls. The key coefficient of interest -
the interaction term between Scotland and the post-policy period -
captures the differential change in these needs-based poverty
measures following the introduction of the SCP.


The results point to statistically significant reductions in both child
material deprivation and food insecurity in Scotland relative to
England, after the introduction of the SCP. These results are present
and significant in the raw results (without controls) and increase in
size when controls are included. The effects are considerable in size:
they suggest that both material deprivation and food insecurity would
have been between 8 and 9 percentage points higher in Scotland
without the SCP. This translates to just over 70,000 fewer children in
Scotland living in material deprivation and food insecurity than we
predict would have been the case without the policy.


We conduct two main robustness checks to test these results further
(see Appendix Table A4). Results remain consistent when we redefine
the control group using the rest of the UK rather than England alone.
When we exclude children from families with at least one child under
the age of six between February 2021 and November 2022, the
results increase in size to an effect of between 10 and 12 percentage
points.   This   suggests   our   main   estimates   may   be   a   slight
underestimate, biased downwards by the inclusion in the pre-SCP
group of some families who are already receiving small SCP
payments.


                                    32
Table 3: Difference-in-Differences Estimates
                                       A: Child Material              B: Food insecurity
                                         Deprivation
 Scotland * Post                  -0.066***      -0.085***         -0.064***      0.088***
                                    (0.019)        (0.022)           (0.019)       (0.021)
 Scotland                         -0.043***      -0.019***            0.003          0.017
                                    (0.006)        (0.006)           (0.009)       (0.009)
 Post                              0.087***         -0.022          0.048***        -0.025
                                    (0.007)        (0.014)           (0.007)       (0.013)
 Young household head                             0.110***                        0.086***
                                                   (0.015)                         (0.021)
 Female household head                            0.053***                        0.043***
                                                   (0.005)                         (0.006)
 Ethnicity
        Mixed                                       0.090***                      0.081***
                                                     (0.015)                       (0.020)
        Asian                                       0.108***                      0.020**
                                                     (0.007)                       (0.007)
        Black                                       0.178***                      0.087***
                                                     (0.011)                       (0.014)
                                                    0.163***                      0.055***
        Other                                        (0.014)                       (0.016)
                                                    0.154***                      0.140***
 Disability in household                             (0.004)                       (0.006)
                                                    0.209***                      0.168***
 Lone parent household                               (0.006)                       (0.008)
                                                    0.115***                      0.071***
 Large family household                              (0.005)                       (0.006)

 Constant                         0.190***            0.006         0.137***      -0.012**
                                   (0.002)           (0.005)         (0.003)       (0.005)

 Controls and year FE                 No               Yes              No           Yes

 N                                  50,945           50,945          27,511        27,511
 𝑅2                                 0.0073           0.1712          0.0036        0.1343
Notes: (i) This table shows estimates from equation (1). (ii) The post period is defined as
children being observed after 14th November 2022, aligning with the rollout of the SCP to
all children aged 16 and under. (iii) Controls include: a dummy variable equal to one if the
child resides in a household with a head aged under 25 years; female head of household;
ethnicity (five categories); disability status of the household; lone parent; and large family,
defined as three or more dependent children in the household. (iv) Estimates are weighted
using the dependent child weight provided in the HBAI dataset (gs_indch). (v) The change
in material deprivation between 2022/23 and 2023/24 reflects changes in the deprivation
questions; therefore, direct comparisons across these years should be interpreted with
caution. (vi) Data for 2020/21 are excluded due to pandemic-related disruptions in survey
collection, which affected data quality and comparability. (vii) *p<0.05, **p<0.01,
p<0.001. (viii) Standard errors are in parentheses. (ix) Black includes Black African, Black
Caribbean, Black British.
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2016/17-2023/24 HBAI data, 19th edition (DWP,
2025).



                                              33
Our quantitative analysis therefore provides strong backing for the
conclusion emerging from the qualitative data: the SCP is having a
very material effect on families in Scotland, reducing both food
insecurity and material deprivation in households with children.



6.    Conclusions

Both our qualitative and our quantitative evidence are consistent in
indicating that the SCP is making a significant difference to family
finances and child wellbeing. Our qualitative data shows that parents
were able to increase spending on items necessary to children's
healthy development such as nutritious food, clothing and utilities.
This is supported by our quantitative analysis which suggests that
significantly more families are able to meet very basic needs as a
result of the payments: our results suggest that both material
deprivation and food insecurity would have been between 8 and 9
percentage points higher in Scotland without the policy, which
corresponds to over 70,000 fewer children living in material
deprivation and food insecurity as a result of the SCP’s introduction.


In our qualitative interviews some parents told us that they were able
to go beyond the basics to afford extra-curricular curricular and
leisure activities. These are important for the here and now in the
enjoyment they bring and the ability for children to take part in
activities   alongside   their   peers.   Previous   research    indicates
participation in these activities is likely to increase the life chances of
children belonging to households that receive the SCP; studies have
linked extra curricular activities to positive outcomes including higher



                                    34
educational   attainment,      civic    engagement     and   psychological
flourishing (Guilmette et al., 2019; Mahoney & Vest, 2012).


In line with early research into the SCP (Scottish Government, 2022;
Stratham, Smith and Parkes, 2023), our qualitative findings also
show that the presence of the SCP can lower parental stress. This is
also significant both to children's everyday experiences and their
longer-term outcomes. Previous research shows reductions in
benefits and subsequent decreased ability to cover essential costs can
trigger emotional distress among parents and can result in more
tensions and conflict within households (Andersen et al, 2024). These
can in turn undermine parents' ability to provide a secure and
comfortable emotional environment within the household (Wilkinson
& Pickett, 2010). This may negatively impact children's health
development by putting children at heightened risk of experiencing
depression    and   anxiety,    substance    misuse,    declining   school
performance, and other anti-social behaviours (Conger et al., 1999).
Our early findings suggest that the presence of the SCP's ability to
decrease stress will result in a calmer home environment for children
and reduce the negative knock-on effects of parental emotional
distress. Subject to data availability, we will explore this mechanism
further through quantitative investigation of parental anxiety and life
satisfaction using Annual Population Survey data.


The research findings also demonstrate the importance of giving cash
payments directly to parents. Some detractors of the SCP argue that
the money spent on the policy would be better spent on area-based
investments and targeted support for families with more complex
needs (McNulty, 2024). While we do not dispute the importance of


                                       35
such measures, our findings show that the SCP instantly helps
parents to meet their children's needs which is of critical importance
given the erosion of benefits over the past 15 years and subsequent
hardship it has caused. It also gives parents the immediate agency to
spend on children as they see fit and recognises that they are best
placed to choose the particular material items, services and activities
their children need to thrive.


While the parents were unequivocal in the help the SCP provides,
some families were still struggling to get by and were using the
money as a lifeline to tide them over to their next Universal Credit
payment. As the timing of the introduction of the SCP has coincided
with the ongoing cost of living crisis and has been implemented
following 15 years of austerity policies, the SCP is not at a high
enough level to provide many families with the income they need to
enable their children to go beyond surviving to thriving.


Our comparison interviews with English families are very striking in
that parents report that if they had the money, they would spend it
on similar items (such as food, clothes and extra-curricular activities)
to Scottish parents. This demonstrates the inadequacy of social
security provision in recent years in enabling parents to provide for
their children's needs, and shows that parents prioritise spending on
children. The comparison also demonstrates that the SCP makes a
significant difference in enabling parents to meet their children's
needs. This suggests without additional support in England, we are
likely to see a divergence in outcomes for children between the two
nations. Extra financial support for English households would
decrease this burgeoning inequality.


                                  36
This article reports on early findings that contribute to an emerging
evidence base. Our future research will build on this further by
applying quasi-experimental methods to evaluate the impact of the
SCP. Using data from the FRS, we will analyse the effect of the SCP
on household finances and mental health. In addition, data from the
Annual Population Survey will be used to assess the policy’s impact
on labour market outcomes. A particular focus will be on whether the
SCP creates work disincentives through cliff-edge effects. The
quantitative findings will be interpreted in conjunction with rich, in
depth qualitative data obtained from our individual interviews.
Together    they   will   offer   a    much-needed    comprehensive
understanding of the SCP’s effects on families.


For now, our mixed methods research highlights that the SCP is a
crucial measure in alleviating financial hardship. However, due to the
extent of the cuts in social security provision over the past fifteen
years and the recent socioeconomic shocks, there is still a lot more
to be done to reduce both the breadth and the depth of child poverty.
We end with the words of Olivia, who was unequivocal about both the
positive impact of the SCP, and the need for more to be done:



     "I probably would say how a positive impact for me it’s
     having on my household…certainly if they increased it that
     would make it; I think it would pull up a lot of parents
     including myself more out of the water…They’ve got a long
     ways to go to eradicating child poverty and this is just
     beginning."



                                  37
References

Andersen, K., Redman, J., Patrick, R. and Stewart, K. (2024) ‘“It’s the kids
     that suffer”: Exploring how the UK’s benefit cap and two-child limit
     harm children,’ Social Policy and Administration, 59(1): 57-72.
Chzhen, Y., Howarth, C., & Main, G. (2022). Deprivation and intra-family
     conflict: Children as agents in the family stress model. Journal of
     Marriage and Family, 84(1), 121–140.
Conger, K., Rueter, M. and Conger, R. (1999), The role of economic
     pressure in the lives of parents and their adolescents: the Family
     Stress Model. In Crockett, L and Silbereisen, R. (eds) Negotiating
     Adolescence in Times of Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 201-223.
Cooper, K., & Stewart, K. (2021). Does household income affect children's
     outcomes? A systematic review of the evidence. Child Indicators
     Research, 14(3), 981–1005.
Dahl, G. B., & Lochner, L. (2012). The impact of family income on child
      achievement: Evidence from the earned income tax credit. American
      Economic Review, 102, 1927–1956.
Department for Work and Pensions (2025), Households Below Average
     Income Statistics, London: Department for Work and Pensions,
     available                                                   at:
     https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/households-below-
     average-income-hbai--2
DWP (Department for Work and Pensions). (2025). Households Below
    Average Income, 2009/10-2023/24. [data collection]. 19th Edition.
    UK Data Service. SN: 5828, http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-5828-
    13.
Duncan, G and J Brooks-Gunn (1997) Consequences of Growing Up Poor,
     Russell Sage Foundation.
Evans, W. N., & Garthwaite, C. L. (2014). Giving mom a break: The impact
     of higher EITC payments on maternal health. American Economic
     Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2), 258–290.
Gennetian, L and C Miller (2002) ‘Children and welfare reform: A view from
     an experimental welfare program in Minnesota,’ Child Development,
     73: 601-620.
Gregg, P., Waldfogel, J., & Washbrook, E. (2006). Family expenditures
     post-welfare reform in the UK: Are low-income families starting to
     catch up? Labour Economics, 13(6), 721–746.
Guilmette, M, Mulvihill, K, Villemaire-Krajden, R and Barker, E. (2019), Past
     and present participation in extracurricular activities is associated
     with adaptive self-regulation of goals, academic success, and


                                     38
      emotional wellbeing among university students, Learning and
      Individual Differences, 73, 8–5.
HM Government (2012) Measuring Child Poverty: A consultation on better
    measures of child poverty, CM 8483.
HM Treasury (2001) Tackling child poverty: Giving every child the best
     possible start in life, pre-budget report document. London: HM
     Treasury.
Hoynes, H., Miller, D., & Simon, D. (2015). Income, the earned income tax
     credit, and infant health. American Economic Journal: Economic
     Policy, 7(1), 172–211
Joseph Rowntree Foundation. (2025). UK Poverty 2025. Available at:
     https://www.jrf.org.uk/uk-poverty-2025-the-essential-guide-to-
     understanding-poverty-in-the-uk#how-to-cite-this-report
Le Menestrel, S (2019) ‘Consequences of Child Poverty,’ Chapter 3 in S Le
     Menestrel and G Duncan (eds) A Roadmap to Reducing Child Poverty,
     National Library of Medicine, Washington D.C.: National Academies
     Press.
Lesner, R (2018) ‘The long-term effect of childhood poverty,’ Journal of
     Population Economics, 31: 969-1004.
Mahoney, J.L. and Vest, A.E. (2012), The over-scheduling hypothesis
     revisited: Intensity of organized activity participation during
     adolescence and young adult outcomes, Journal of Research on
     Adolescence, 22 (3), 409–418.
McNulty, D (2024) Tackling Child Poverty in Scotland: Striking the Right
     Balance,    Reform    Scotland.    https://www.enlighten.scot/wp-
     content/uploads/2024/08/Tackling-Child-Poverty-in-Scotland.pdf
Milligan, K., & Stabile, M. (2011). Do child tax benefits affect the well-being
       of children? Evidence from Canadian child benefit expansions.
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3, 175–205.
Mnyanda, L. and Borrett, A. (2023). How a £25 payment is turning Scotland
     into a European pioneer in reducing child deprivation. Available at:
     https://www.ft.com/content/cf41b5d9-c714-40a2-b66d-
     251efde61504
Patrick,   R., Andersen,      K., Reader,    M., Reeves,    A.,    & Stewart,
      K. (2023). Needs and entitlements: Welfare reform and larger
      families final report. https://largerfamilies.study/publications/needs-
      and-entitlements
Randolph, H., Congreve, E. & Milne, K (2024), The impact of the Scottish
     Child
Payment on the need for food banks, Fraser of Allendar Institute, Glasgow,
    available    at:    https://cms.trussell.org.uk/sites/default/files/wp-


                                      39
     assets/Impact-of-the-Scottish-Child-Payment-on-the-Need-for-
     Food-Banks-The-Trussell-Trust-2024.pdf
Scottish Government (2017). Social Security Principles and a Rights Based
      Approach. Available at: https://www.gov.scot/publications/social-
      security-principles-and-a-rights-based-approach/
Scottish Government (2019). Income Supplement: Analysis of Option.
      Available at: https://www.gov.scot/publications/analysis-options-
      income-supplement/
Scottish Government (2020). Scottish Child Payment: Equality impact
      assessment.                      Available                     at:
      https://www.gov.scot/publications/scottish-child-payment-impact-
      assessments-eqia/
Scottish Government (2022).     Interim Evaluation of Scottish Child
      Payment. Edinburgh: The Scottish Government.
Scottish Government (2024). Scottish Child Payment and the Labour
      Market. Edinburgh: The Scottish Government.
Scottish Government. (2025). Evaluation of the Five Family Payments.
      Edinburgh: The Scottish Government.
Simpson, M. (2025). Social security in the four UK countries: Who does
     what and where? Safety Nets Working Paper, May 2025.
Social Security Scotland (2023), Overview of Scottish Child Payment,
      Glasgow:     Social     Security     Scotland,    available at:
      https://www.socialsecurity.gov.scot/guidance-
      resources/guidance/overview-of-scottish-child-payment
Starmer, K. (2024), Prime Minister Keir Starmer holds a press conference
     at 10 Downing Street, London: No 10 Downing Street, available at:
     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SMlICJmROBo
Stewart, K, Patrick, R. and Reeves, A. (2024) ‘The sins of the parents:
     Conceptualizing adult-oriented reforms to family policy,’ Journal of
     European Social Policy.
Stewart, K., Andersen, K., Reader, M., Reeves, A. and Patrick, R. (2025)
     ‘Does cutting child benefits mean parents work more? A mixed
     methods study of the UK’s “two child limit”,’ Social Service Review.
Stratham, R., Smith, C. and Parkes, H. Tackling child poverty and
      destitution: Next steps for the Scottish Child Payment and the
      Scottish         Welfare          Fund.          Available        at:
      https://cms.trussell.org.uk/sites/default/files/wp-assets/Scotland-
      Tackling-Child-Poverty-and-Destitution.pdf
Unicef (2023 ) Child Poverty in the Midst of Wealth, Innocenti Report Card
      18,          Geneva:           Unicef,          available        at:
      https://www.unicef.org/innocenti/media/3296/file/UNICEF-
      Innocenti-Report-Card-18-Child-Poverty-Amidst-Wealth-2023.pdf

                                    40
Waldfogel, J (2025). Child Benefits: A Smart Investment for America’s
     Future. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Wilkinson, R. and Pickett, K. (2010), The Spirit Level: Why Equality is Better
      for Everyone. London: Penguin.
Work and Pensions Committee (2019) Twenty-First Special Report of
     Session 2017–19, Two-child limit: Government Response to the
     Committee’s Twenty-Third Report, HC 2147. London: House of
     Commons.




                                     41
         Appendix


Table A1: Summary Statistics for children observed before and after the SCP by country of residence, 2016/17 - 2023/24


                                                   Scotland                                             England


                                  All          Pre-SCP             Post-SCP            All         Pre-SCP             Post-SCP

Child Material Deprivation      0.151           0.147                0.168           0.205           0.190                 0.277
Food Insecure Households        0.135           0.139                0.124           0.150           0.137                 0.185

Larger families                 0.252           0.244                0.295          0.320           0.313                  0.353
Lone parent households          0.225           0.217                0.265          0.224           0.222                  0.235
Young head of household         0.041           0.040                0.045          0.030           0.031                  0.023
Female head of household        0.427           0.422                0.452          0.410           0.405                  0.435
Disabled household              0.381           0.357                0.504          0.355           0.345                  0.408
White households                0.918           0.919                0.915          0.766           0.771                  0.739
                        N       6,089           5,471                 618           44,856          38,772                 6,084


         Notes: (i) Mean values of each variable by country and SCP rollout, where post-SCP is defined as after the 14th
         November 2022. (ii) We use the dependent child weight provided in the HBAI dataset.
         Source: Authors’ calculations using 2016/17-2023/24 HBAI data, 19th edition (DWP, 2025).




                                                              42
 Table A2: Parallel covariate trends test (all children)


                      Larger      Lone parent      Young head        Female head         Disabled         White
                     families     households       of household      of household       household       household

 Scot * 2017/18        -0.004         0.018            -0.007             0.027           -0.017          -0.022
                      (0.020)        (0.020)          (0.012)            (0.024)         (0.023)         (0.013)

 Scot * 2018/19       -0.038*         0.024            -0.009             0.002           -0.007          -0.004
                      (0.019)        (0.029)          (0.011)            (0.023)         (0.023)         (0.014)

 Scot * 2019/20       -0.041*         0.028            -0.011             0.030           -0.021          -0.000
                      (0.019)        (0.019)          (0.012)            (0.024)         (0.023)         (0.014)

 Scot * 2021/22       -0.054*         -0.042          -0.032*             -0.027          -0.009          0.007
                      (0.025)        (0.023)          (0.013)            (0.029)         (0.029)         (0.016)

 Scot * 2022/23        0.001          -0.031           -0.016             -0.022          -0.019          -0.037
                      (0.024)        (0.022)          (0.0130            (0.028)         (0.027)         (0.020)

 Scot * 2023/24        -0.010         0.053            0.005              0.031          0.078*           0.012
                      (0.032)        (0.032)          (0.015)            (0.032)         (0.031)         (0.017)

 Controls               No             No                No                No               No              No

 N                    50,945         50,945            50,945            50,945           50,945          50,945

Notes: (i) The table reports estimates of 𝛿 from Equation (1), where the Post variable is replaced with a dummy
variable for each year and regression are run with each covariate in turn as the outcome variable. (ii) The reference
category is 2016/17. (iii) 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑡 is a dummy variable equal to one if the child resides in Scotland and zero if they
reside in England. (iii) Estimates are weighted using the dependent child weight provided in the HBAI dataset
(gs_indch). (iv) Standard errors in parentheses. (v) *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001.
Source: Authors’ calculations using HBAI 19th edition (DWP, 2025) .




                                                        43
Table A3: Parallel trends test: outcomes variables


                                                     A: Child Material Deprivation    B: Food Insecurity


Scot * 14th February 2017 - 13th May 2017               0.010           0.014           -             -
                                                       (0.034)         (0.030)


Scot * 14th May 2017 - 13th August 2017                 0.037           0.036           -             -
                                                       (0.033)         (0.030)


Scot * 14th August 2017 - 13th November 2017            0.001           -0.019          -             -
                                                       (0.029)         (0.027)


Scot * 14th November 2017 - 13th February 2018          0.045           0.061           -             -
                                                       (0.035)         (0.035)


Scot * 14th February 2018 - 13th May 2018               0.007           0.041           -             -
                                                       (0.031)         (0.030)


Scot * 14th May 2018 - 13th August 2018                0.066*          0.062*           -             -
                                                       (0.032)         (0.030)


Scot * 14th August 2018 - 13th November 2018            0.047           0.048           -             -
                                                       (0.035)         (0.034)


Scot * 14th November 2018 - 13th February 2019          0.053           0.040           -             -
                                                       (0.032)         (0.030)


Scot * 14th February 2019 - 13th May 2019               0.045          0.077*           -             -
                                                       (0.032)         (0.031)


Scot * 14th May 2019 - 13th August 2019                0.069*          0.065*         -0.033        -0.059
                                                       (0.033)         (0.031)       (0.052)       (0.054)


Scot * 14th August 2019 - 13th November 2019            0.040           0.040         -0.036        -0.056
                                                       (0.032)         (0.029)       (0.052)       (0.054)


Scot * 14th November 2019 - 13th February 2020         0.104**         0.104***       0.036         0.015
                                                       (0.034)         (0.030)       (0.054)       (0.056)


Scot * 14th February 2020 - 13th May 2021               -0.029          0.038         -0.088        -0.054
                                                       (0.029)         (0.028)       (0.053)       (0.055)


Scot * 14th May 2021 - 13th August 2021                 -0.041          -0.003        -0.094        -0.082
                                                       (0.030)         (0.030)       (0.052)       (0.055)


                                                        44
Scot * 14th August 2021 - 13th November 2021                    0.083            0.103*              0.043            0.034
                                                               (0.048)           (0.043)            (0.063)          (0.063)


Scot * 14th November 2021 - 13th February 2022                  -0.015            0.012              -0.007           -0.008
                                                               (0.041)           (0.036)            (0.062)          (0.060)


Scot * 14th February 2022 - 13th May 2022                       0.078            0.085*              -0.080           -0.092
                                                               (0.049)           (0.042)            (0.060)          (0.060)


Scot * 14th May 2022 - 13th August 2022                         -0.008            -0.016             -0.047           0.078
                                                               (0.036)           (0.035)            (0.058)          (0.060)


Scot * 14th August 2022 - 13th November 2022                    0.046             0.053            -0.142**         -0.147**
                                                               (0.056)           (0.054)            (0.053)          (0.055)


Scot * 14th November 2022 - 13th February 2023                 -0.067*            -0.052             -0.098           -0.101
                                                               (0.031)           (0.030)            (0.056)          (0.058)


Scot * 14th February 2023 - 13th May 2023                       0.052             0.052              0.031            0.011
                                                               (0.047)           (0.045)            (0.066)          (0.068)


Scot * 14th May 2023 - 13th August 2023                        -0.093*           -0.096**          -0.162**         -0.182**
                                                               (0.038)            (0.034)           (0.057)          (0.059)


Scot * 14th August 2023 - 13th November 2023                    -0.065           -0.122*           -0.184***        -0.256***
                                                               (0.041)           (0.052)            (0.054)          (0.061)


Scot * 14th November 2023 - 13th February 2024                  0.034             0.081              -0.010           0.006
                                                               (0.059)           (0.051)            (0.074)          (0.071)


Controls                                                          No               Yes                No               Yes

N                                                              45,175             45,175            26,852           26,853

                          𝑅2                                   0.0112             0.1762            0.0129           0.1414

       Notes: (i) The table reports estimates of 𝛿 from Equation (1), where the Post variable is replaced with a dummy
       variable for quarterr. (ii) The reference category for child material deprivation is 14th November 2016 - 13th
       February 2017 and for food insecurity is 14th February 2019 - 13th May 2019. (iii) 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑡 is a dummy variable
       equal to one if the child resides in Scotland and zero if they reside in England. (iv) Controls are included for large
       families (3+ children), lone parenthood, young head of household (under 25), female head of household, disability
       within the household, and ethnicity (five categories). (v) Estimates are weighted using the dependent child weight
       provided in the HBAI dataset (gs_indch). (vi) Standard errors in parentheses. (v) *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001.
       Source: Authors’ calculations using HBAI 19th edition (DWP, 2025).




                                                                45
Table A4: Difference-in-Differences Estimates, Sensitivity Analysis


                                 Dropping families with a child under 6 (Feb       Children from rest of the UK as the control
                                 2021 - Nov 2022)                                                    group

                                   A: Child Material       B: Food insecurity       A: Child Material      B: Food insecurity
                                     Deprivation                                      Deprivation

Scotland * Post                  -0.087***   -0.102***       -        -0.125***   -0.065***   -0.084***       -      -0.086***
                                  (0.020)     (0.023)    0.104***      (0.021)     (0.019)      (0.021)   0.062***    (0.050)
Scotland                         -0.046***   -0.026***   (0.019)        0.019     -0.040***    -0.017**   (0.019)      0.017*
                                  (0.006)     (0.006)     0.006        (0.010)     (0.006)      (0.006)    0.003      (0.009)
Post                              0.101***     0.013     (0.010)        0.003      0.086***      -0.023   (0.009)     -0.024*
                                  (0.008)     (0.017)    0.062***      (0.016)     (0.007)      (0.013)   0.047***    (0.012)
                                                         (0.008)                                          (0.007)

Young head of household                      0.134***                 0.088***                0.107***                0.086***
                                             (0.018)                  (0.026)                 (0.014)                 (0.020)
Female head of household                     0.054***                 0.039***                0.051***                0.043***
                                             (0.005)                  (0.007)                 (0.004)                 (0.006)
Ethnicity
    - Mixed                                  0.054**                   0.045                  0.091***                0.080***
                                             (0.017)                  (0.025)                 (0.015)                 (0.020)
    -   Asian                                0.109***                  0.014                  0.109***                0.022**
                                             (0.008)                  (0.009)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)
    -   Black/African                        0.171***                 0.099***                0.183***                0.087***
        Caribbean/Black                      (0.011)                  (0.016)                 (0.011)                 (0.014)
        British                              0.213***                 0.084***                0.164***                0.058***
    -   Other                                (0.017)                  (0.020)                 (0.014)                 (0.016)
                                             0.152***                 0.138***                0.154***                0.139***
Disability status of household               (0.005)                  (0.006)                 (0.004)                 (0.005)
                                             0.216***                 0.178***                0.207***                0.169***
Lone parent household                        (0.007)                  (0.010)                 (0.006)                 (0.008)
                                             0.118***                 0.077***                0.114***                0.074***
Large family household                       (0.005)                  (0.007)                 (0.004)                 (0.005)



                                                                                       46
Constant                           0.190***       0.009      0.133***       -0.013*       0.188***       0.001      0.136***     -0.011**
                                   (0.003)       (0.005)     (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.004)     (0.003)       (0.004)

Controls and year FE                  No           Yes           No           Yes            No           Yes          No           Yes

N                                   40,557       40,557       20,002        20,002        60,680        60,680       33,065       33,065

             𝑅2                     0.0103       0.1762       0.0069        0.1380        0.0071        0.1700       0.0034       0.1350
        Notes: (i) This table shows estimates from equation (1) after dropping children from households with at least one child under age six between February 2021 and November
        2022, when the SCP was restricted to this age group at £10 per week, and redefines the control group as all children living in the rest of the UK. (ii) The post period is defined
        as children being observed after 14th November 2022, aligning with the rollout of the SCP to all children aged 16 and under. (iii) Controls include: a dummy variable equal to
        one if the child resides in a household with a head aged under 25 years; female head of household; ethnicity (five categories); disability status of the household; lone parent;
        and large family, defined as three or more dependent children in the household. (iv) Estimates are weighted using the dependent child weight provided in the HBAI dataset
        (gs_indch). (v) The change in material deprivation between 2022/23 and 2023/24 reflects changes in the deprivation questions; therefore, direct comparisons across these years
        should be interpreted with caution. (vi) Data for 2020/21 are excluded due to pandemic-related disruptions in survey collection, which affected data quality and comparability.
        (vii) *p<0.05, **p<0.01, p<0.001. (viii) Standard errors are in parentheses.
        Source: Authors’ calculations using 2016/17-2023/24 HBAI data, 19th edition (DWP, 2025).




                                                                                               47
